---
title: Why no one uses STEP files (and why you probably won't change that either)
description: ISO 10303 is a mess
layout: post
toc: false
categories: [CAD, Software]
comments: true
image: images/2022-08-23-ISO10303.jpg
---
{% include alert.html text="This post is a rant and may not convey useful information to the reader" %}

That title seems a bit absurd, right?
All the major CAD systems speak in STEP files, it is the standard everyone uses.
But something peculiar happens when you look at smaller CAD tools, 3D-Slicers, and similar, none of them support STEP files, mostly going for STL files instead.
This has become so second nature to many of us that we don't even question why we need to convert our pristine model into a technically inferior format to get it printed, but we sure encounter the issues that come from this.

- Visible faceting on round surfaces
- Inconsistent dimensions on internal vs external features
- Overlapping geometry or non-watertight shells needing repair
- Large file sizes
- Inability to edit these files without complex reconstruction

And it's not like printers benefit from this, most try to convert back from the jagged straight lines and flat faces to a more smooth curve, either directly in the slicer itself or in the printers firmware.
So why are we turning our pristine smooth surfaces into jagged approximations only to try to convert them back again?

## BRep is hard

There is no question about it, representing geometry through mathematically defined surfaces and their edges is hard, or at least significantly harder than triangular meshes, where every face is flat and every edge is a straight line.

But there is plenty of other hard stuff that still gets implemented, especially if it's useful, so why isn't

## What is a STEP file

If you, like me, have worked with mechanical CAD you have an intuitive understanding of what a STEP file is, that thing that contains the BRep model.
That understanding however is (mostly) wrong.
STEP, more formally known as ISO 10303 is a "Standard for the Exchange of Product model data" and can contain anything and everything engineering related under the sun.
Mechanical, electrical, software, furniture design, ship building, life cycle management, chemical plant design, fluid dynamics and the list goes on and on.
To accomplish this ISO 10303 has been split into hundreds of separate parts that have since their introduction been updated, extended, superseded, merged and abandoned many times.

It is hard to even understand what some of these parts are about, as each of them is locked behind a separate paywall

## ISO 10303 is a bad standard

ISO 10303 is too large and complex to be fully implemented by anyone, not just because of the tremendous amount of effort it would take, but also as there is no application that would require all of its cross-disciplinary parts.
Even when just implementing the parts of the standard you need for your particular application, like AP214, there are still hundreds of parts to that, most of them are unused by nearly all applications.

Working with ISO 10303 involves cherry-picking the parts you need and hoping not to encounter the parts that you have ignored, which is the exact opposite of what a standard should be.

Just understanding the Standard is made tremendously difficult as its specifications are not open, but rather locked behind a paywall, where getting any information about any of the parts costs hundreds if not thousands of dollars.

## Conclusions

Unless you happen to be a tech giant looking to dump  millions into a useable implementation of  ISO 10303 you might as well give up now

## Links

[**OPENCASCADE**:](https://www.opencascade.com/open-cascade-technology/)
An open-source BRep implementation, the one used in FreeCAD. Most people that use it hate it, but given it's pretty much your only option it might still be your best bet.

[**Foxtrot**:](https://www.mattkeeter.com/projects/foxtrot/)
A STEP viewer that actually implemented enough of the STEP standard from scratch to be able to view some models, made from a small, extremely talented team for a coding challenge.
It also describes some of the many obstacles they faced during development.